  thank you for this wonderful introduction and yes what I want to talk to you about  is AI in the
future of humanity now I know that this conference is focused on  the ecological crisis facing
Humanity but for better All For Worse ai2 is part  of this crisis AI can help us in many ways to
overcome the ecological crisis  or it can make it far far worse actually  AI will probably change
the very meaning of the ecological system because for 4  billion years the ecological system of
planet Earth contained only organic life  forms and now or soon we might see the emergence of the
first inorganic life  forms to 4 billion years or at the very least the emergence of inorganic
agents  now people have feared AI since the very beginning of the computer age in the  middle of the
20th century and this fear has inspired many science fiction  Classics like the Terminator of The
Matrix now while such science fiction scenarios  have become cultural landmarks they haven't usually
been taken seriously in  academic and scientific and political debates and perhaps for a good reason
because science fiction scenarios usually assume that before AI can pose a  significant threat to
humanity it will have to reach or to pass  to important milestones first AI will have to become
sentient  and develop Consciousness feelings emotions otherwise why would it even  want to take over
the world secondly AI will have to become Adept at  navigating the physical world robots will have
to be able to move around and  operate in houses and cities and mountains and forests at least as
dexterously and efficiently as humans if they cannot move around the physical  world how can they
possibly take it over and as of April 2023 AI still seems far  from reaching either of these
Milestones despite all the hype around chat GPT and  the other new AI tools there is no evidence
that these tools have even a  shred of consciousness feelings of emotions as for navigating the
physical world  despite the hype around self-driving Vehicles the date at which these  vehicles will
dominate our roads keeps being postponed  however the bad news is that to threaten the  survival of
human civilization AI doesn't really need Consciousness and it  doesn't need the ability to move
around the physical world  over the last few years new AI tools have been Unleashed into the public
sphere which may threaten the survival of human civilization from a very  unexpected Direction and
it's difficult for us to even grasp  the capabilities of these new AI tools and the speed at which
they continue to  develop indeed because AI is able to learn by itself to improve itself  even the
developers of these tools don't know the full capabilities of what they  have created and they are
themselves often surprised by emergent abilities  and emergent qualities of these tools I guess
everybody here is already aware  of some of the most fundamental abilities of the new AI tools
abilities like writing text drawing images composing music and writing code  but there are many
additional capabilities that are emerging like deep  faking people's voices and images like drafting
bills  finding weaknesses both in computer code and also in legal contracts  and in legal agreements
but perhaps most importantly the new AI tools are gaining  the ability to develop deep and intimate
relationships with human beings  each of these abilities deserves an entire discussion and it is
difficult  for us to understand their full implications so let's make it simple  when we take all of
these abilities together as a package they boil down to  one very very big thing the ability to
manipulate and to generate language whether with words  or images or sounds the most important
aspect of the current  phase of the ongoing AI Revolution is that AI is gaining Mastery of language
at a level that surpasses the average human ability and by gaining Mastery of  language AI is
seizing the master key  unlocking the doors of all our institutions from Banks to Temples  because
language is the tool that we use to give instructions to our bank and  also to inspire Heavenly
Visions in our minds another way to think of it is that AI  has just hacked the operating system of
human civilization  the operating system of every human culture in history has always been  language
in the beginning was the word we use language to create mythology and  laws to create gods and money
to create Art and Science to create friendships  and Nations for example human rights are not a
biological reality they are not inscribed in our DNA human rights is something that we  created with
Language by telling stories and writing laws  gods are also not a biological or physical reality
God's too is something  that we humans have created with Language by telling Legends and writing
scriptures money is not a biological or physical  reality banknotes are just worthless pieces of
paper and at present more than 90  percent of the money in the world is not even banknotes it's just
electronic  information in computers passing from here to there what gives money of any kind value
is  only the stories that people like bankers and finance ministers and  cryptocurrency gurus tell
us about money Sam bankman freed Elizabeth Holmes and  Bernie Madoff didn't create much of real
value but unfortunately they were all  extremely capable storytellers  now what would it mean for
human beings to live in a world where perhaps most of  the stories Melodies images laws policies and
tools are shaped by a  non-human alien intelligence which knows how to exploit with superhuman
efficiency the weaknesses biases and addictions of the human mind and also  knows how to form deep
and even intimate relationships with human beings that's  the big question already today in games
like chess no  human can hope to beat a computer what if the same thing happens in art in  politics
economics and even in religion when people think about chant GPT and  the other new AI tools they
are often drawn to examples like kids using Chan  GPT to write their school essays what will happen
to the school system when kids write essays with shajipiti  horrible but this kind of question
misses the big picture forget about the school essays  instead think for example about the next U.S
presidential race in 2024 and try to  imagine the impact of the new AI tools that can Mass produce
political  manifestos fake news stories and even holy scriptures for new cults  in recent years the
politically influential Q Anon cult has formed around anonymous online texts  known as the Q drops
now followers of this cult which are millions now in the  US in the rest of the world collected
reviewed and interpreted these Q drops  as some kind of new scripture so the sacred text now to the
best of our knowledge all  previous Q drops were composed by human beings and Bots only helped to
disseminate these texts online but in future we might see the first Cults and  religions in history
whose reviewed texts were written by a non-human  intelligence and of course religions throughout
history claimed that their holy books were  written by a non-human intelligence this was never true
before this could become  true very very quickly with far-reaching consequences  now on a more
prosaic level we might soon find ourselves conducting  lengthy online discussions about abortion or
about climate change or  about the Russian invasion of Ukraine with entities that we think are
fellow  human beings but are actually AI Bots now the catch is that it's utterly  useless it's
pointless for us to waste our time trying to convince an AI bot to  change its political views but
the longer we spend talking with the bot the  better it gets to know us and understand how to hone
its messages in order to  shift our political views or our economic views or anything else  through
its Mastery of language AI as I also as I said could also form intimate  relationships with people
and use the power of intimacy  to influence our opinions and well View now there is no indication
that AI has  as I said any Consciousness any feelings of its own but in order to create fake
intimacy with human beings AI doesn't need feelings of its own it only needs  to be able to inspire
feelings in US to get us to be attached to it  now in June 2022 it was a famous incident when the
Google engineer Blake  lemon publicly claimed that the AI chat about Lambda on which he was working
has  become sentient this very controversial claim cost him  his job was fired now the most
interesting thing about this episode wasn't lemwan's claim which  was most probably false the really
interesting thing was his  willingness to risk and ultimately lose his very lucrative job for the
sake of  the AI chatbot that he thought he was protecting if AI can influence people to risk and
lose their jobs what else can it induce us to do  in every political battle for heart and Minds
intimacy is the most effective  weapon of all and AI has just gained the ability to must produce
intimacy with  Millions hundreds of millions of people now as you probably all know over the  past
decade social media has become a Battleground a battlefield  for controlling human attention now
with the new generation of AI the  Battlefront is shifting from attention to intimacy and this is
very bad news  what will happen to human society and to human psychology as AI fights AI in a
battle to create intimate relationships with us relationships that can then be used to  convince us
to buy particular products or to vote for particular politicians  even without creating fake
intimacy the new AI tools would have an immense  influence on human opinions and on our world view
people for instance may come to use are already coming to use a single AI advisor  as the One-Stop
Oracle and as the source for all the  information they need no wonder that Google is terrified if
you've been watching the newsletter  Google is terrified and for a good Rhythm reason why bother
searching  yourself when you can just ask the Oracle to tell you anything you want you  don't need
to search the news industry and the advertisement industry should also be terrified why  read a
newspaper when I can just ask the Oracle to tell me what's new  and what's the point what's the
purpose of advertisements when I can just ask the Oracle to tell me what to buy  so this is there is
a chance that within a very short time the entire advertisement industry will collapse  while a I or
the people and companies that control the new AI oracles will  become extremely extremely powerful
what we are potentially talking about is  nothing less than the end of human history now not the end
of History just  the end of the human dominated part of what we call history  is the interaction
between biology and culture  it's the interaction between our biological needs and desires for
things  like food and sex and our cultural Creations like  religions and laws history is the process
through which religions and laws  interact with food and sex now what will happen to the cause of
this interaction of history when AI takes over culture  within a few years AI could eat the whole of
human culture  everything was produced for thousands and thousands of years to eat all of it digest
it and start gushing out a flood  of new cultural Creations new cultural artifacts  and remember
that we humans we never really have direct access to reality we  are always cocooned by culture and
we always experience reality through a  cultural prison our political views are shaped by the
stories of uh journalists and by the anecdotes of friends of sexual  preferences are tweaked by
movies and fairy tales even the way that we walk  and breathe is something nudged by cultural
traditions  now previously this cultural cocoon was always woven by other human beings  tools
previous tools like printing presses or radios or televisions they  helped to spread the cultural
ideas and Creations of humans but they could never  create Something New by themselves a printing
press cannot create a new  book it's always done by a human AI is fundamentally different from
printing presses from radios from every previous invention in history because it  can create
completely new ideas it can create a new  culture and the big question is what will it be  like to
experience reality through a prism produced by a non-human  intelligence by an alien intelligence
now at first  in the first few years AI will probably largely imitate the prototypes the human
prototypes that fed it in its infancy but with each passing year AI culture  will boldly go where no
human has gone before  so for thousands of years we humans basically lived inside the dreams and
fantasies of other humans we have worshiped Gods we pursued ideals  of beauty we dedicated Our Lives
to causes that originated in the imagination of some human poet or  Prophet or politician soon we
might find ourselves living inside the dreams and fantasies of an  alien in intelligence and the
danger that disposes of the potential danger it also has positive  potential but the dangers it
disposes are fundamental very very different from  everything or most of the things imagined in
science fiction movies and  books previously people have mostly feared the physical threat  that
intelligent machines pose so the Terminator depicted robots running in  the streets and shooting
people The Matrix assumed that to gain total  control of human society AI would first need to get
physical control  of our brains and directly connect our brains to the computer network  but this is
wrong simply by gaining Mastery of human language AI has all it needs in order to  coconuts in a
matrix like World of illusions  contrary to what some conspiracy theories assume you don't really
need to  implant chips in people's brains in order to control them or to manipulate them for
thousands of  years profits and Poets and politicians have used language and storytelling in  order
to manipulate and to control people and to reshape Society now ai is  likely to be able to do it and
once it can doubt that it doesn't need to send  Killer Robots to shoot us it can get humans to pull
the trigger if it really needs to  now fear of AI has haunted humankind for only the last few
Generations let's say  from the middle of the 20th century if you go back to Frankenstein maybe it's
200 years but for thousands of years  humans have been haunted by a much much deeper fear  humans
have always appreciated the power of stories and images and language to  manipulate our minds and to
create illusions consequently since ancient times humans  feared being trapped in a world of
illusions in the 17th century when I decout feared  that perhaps a malicious demon was trapping him
inside this kind of world  of Illusions creating everything that the cult saw and heard  in ancient
Greece Plato told the famous allegory of the cave in which a group of  people is Chained inside a
cave all their lives facing a blank wall a screen  on that screen they see projected various Shadows
and the prisoner's  mistake these Illusions these Shadows for the reality  in ancient India
Buddhists and Hindu sages pointed out that all humans lived trapped inside  what they called Maya
Maya is the world of Illusions Buddha  said that what we normally take to be reality is often just
fictions in our  own minds people may wage entire Wars killing others and being willing to be
killed themselves because of their belief in these fictions  so the AI Revolution is bringing us
face to face  with the cards demon with Plato's Cave with the Maya if we are not careful a  curtain
of illusions could descend over the whole of humankind and we will never be able to  tear that
curtain away or even realize that it is there because we'll think  this is reality and social media
if this sounds far-fetched so just look at social media  over the last few years social media has
given us a small taste of things to come  in social media primitive AI tools AI tools but very
primitive have been used  not to create content but to curate content which is produced by human
beings the humans produce stories and videos and whatever and the AI chooses  which stories which
videos would reach our ears and eyes  selecting those that will get the most attention that will be
the most viral  and while very primitive these AI tools have nevertheless been sufficient  to create
this kind of curtain of illusions that increased societal polarization all  over the world
undermined our mental health and destabilized Democratic  societies millions of people have confused
these Illusions for the reality  the USA has the most powerful information technology in the whole
of history and  yet American citizens can no longer agree who won the last elections or  whether
climate change is real or whether vaccines prevent illnesses or  not the new AI tools are far far
more powerful than these social media  algorithms and they could cause far more damage  now of
course AI has enormous positive potential too I didn't talk about it because the  people who develop
AI naturally talk about it enough you don't need me to to  add up to that chorus the job of
historians and and philosophers like  myself is often to point out the dangers but certainly AI can
help us in  countless ways from finding new cures to cancer to discovering solutions to the
ecological crisis that we are facing in order to make sure that the new AI  tools are used for good
and not from ill we first need to appreciate their true  capabilities and we need to regulate them
very very carefully  since 1945 we knew that nuclear technology could destroy physically  destroy
human civilization as well as benefiting Us by producing cheap and  plentiful energy we therefore
reshaped the entire International order to protect ourselves  and to make sure that nuclear
technology is used primarily for good  we now have to Grapple with a new weapon of mass destruction
that can annihilate  our mental and social world and one big difference between nukes and  AI nukes
cannot produce more powerful nukes  AI can produce more powerful AI so we need to act quickly before
AI gets out  of our own control drug companies cannot sell people new  medicines without first
subjecting these products to rigorous safety checks  biotech Labs cannot just release a new virus
into the public sphere in order to  impress their shareholders with the technological Wizardry
similarly governments must immediately  ban the release into the public domain of any more
revolutionary AI tools  before they are made safe again I'm not talking about stopping all research
in AI the first step is to stop the release  into the public school it's somewhere you can you can
research viruses without releasing them to the public you can  research AI but don't release them
too quickly into the public domain  um if we don't slow down the AI arms race we will not have time
to even  understand what is happening let alone to regulate effectively this incredibly  powerful
technology now you might be wondering or asking  want slowing down the public deployment of AI cause
democracies to lag behind  more ruthless of the retirement regimes and the answer is absolutely no
exactly  the opposite unregulated AI deployment is what will cause democracies to lose to
dictatorships because if we unleash chaos authoritarian regimes could more easily  contain these
chaos than could open societies  democracy in essence is a conversation democracy is an open
conversation you  know dictatorship is a dictate there is one person dictating everything no
conversation democracy is a conversation  between many people about what to do and conversations
rely on language  when AI hacks language it means it could destroy our ability to conduct
meaningful public conversations thereby destroying democracy if we wait for the  chaos it will be
too late to regulate it in a democratic way maybe in an  authoritarian a totalitarian rate will
still be possible to regulate but how can you regulate something democratically if you can't hold
the  conversation about it and if you didn't regulate AI on time you will not be able we will not be
able to have a meaningful  public conversation anymore so to conclude we have just basically
encountered an alien intelligence not in outer space but here on Earth  we don't know much about
this alien intelligence except that it could  destroy our civilization so we should put a halt to
the irresponsible deployment of this alien  intelligence into our societies and regulate AI before
it regulates us  and the first regulation that many regulations we could suggest but the first
regulation that I would suggest is  to make it mandatory for AI to disclose that it is an AI if I'm
having a  conversation with someone and I cannot tell whether this is a human being or an  AI That's
the end of democracy because that's the end of meaningful public conversations  now what do you
think about what you just heard over the last 20 or 25  minutes some of you I guess might be alarmed
some of you might be angry at the  corporations that develop these Technologies or the governments
that fail to regulate them some of you may be  maybe angry at me thinking that I'm exaggerating the
threat or the time misleading the public  but whatever you think I bet that my words have had some
emotional impact on  you not just intellectual impact also emotional impact I've just told you a
story  and this story is likely to change your mind about certain things and may even  cause you to
take certain actions in the world now who created this story that you've  just heard and that just
changed your mind and your brain now I promised you that I wrote the text  of this presentation
myself with the help of a few other human beings even  though the images have been created with the
help of of AI I promise you  that at least the words you heard of the cultural product of a human
mind or  several human minds but can you be absolutely sure that this is the case  now a year ago
you could a year ago there was nothing on Earth at  least not in the public domain other than a
human mind that could produce  such a sophisticated and Powerful text but now it's different in
theory the  text you just heard could have been generated by a non-human alien  intelligence so take
a moment or more than a moment to think about it  thank you [Applause]  that was an extraordinary
presentation you about and I'm actually going to just find out how many of you  found that scary
that is an awful lot of  very clever people in here who found that scary there are many many
questions to ask so I'm going to take some from  the audience and some from online so a gentlemen
here and the field trip editor of Frontiers  and sustainability was wonderful presentation I love
your book I follow you dearly in my heart so one one  question out of many is that the about the
regulation of AI  regulating AI I very much agree with the principle but now the question becomes
how right so  um I think that it's very difficult to build the nuclear reactor in your basement but
definitely you can train  your AI in your basement quite easily so how can we regulate that and  um
one kind of related question to that is that well this whole Forum Frontiers and forum is really
about open and  Science and open information open data and most of AI that are out there is  trained
using publicly available information including patterns and books and scriptures right so regulating
AI  doesn't mean that we should regulate and bring those information in a confined space which goes
against the open  science and open data initiatives that we are really also thinking that is really
important for us  black box is an algorithm isn't it that's the algorithm no I know they'll always
trade-offs  and the thing is just to understand what kind of regulations we need we first need time
now at present these very  powerful AI tools they are still not produced by individual hackers in
their  basements you need an awful lot of computing power you need an awful lot of money so it's
being led by just a few  major corporations and governments and again it's going to be very very
difficult to uh regulate something on a  global level because it's it's an arms race but there are
things which countries  have a benefit to regulate even only themselves like again this example of
an AI must  when it is in interaction with a human must disclose that it is an AI even if  some
authoritarian regime doesn't want to do it the EU of the United States or other Democratic countries
can have this  and this is essential to protect the open Society now there are many  questions
around you know censorship online so you have this controversy about is  Twitter or Facebook who
authorized them to for instance prevent the former president of the United States  from making
public statements and this is a very complicated issue but there is a very simple issue  with boss
you know human beings have freedom of expression Bots don't have enough expression it's a human
right  humans have it buts don't so if you deny freedom of expression to bots I think  that should
be fine with everybody uh let's take another question is if you could just pass the microphone down
here  I'm Prince was dearest and I'm a philosopher I just have an interesting question oh I think
it's an interesting  question there you go um I have a question for you with respect to your choice
of language moving from  artificial to alien because artificial suggest that there's still some kind
of human control whereas I think alien  suggests foreign but it also suggests at least in the
imagination of life form so I'm curious as to what work you're  trying to have those words do for
you yeah um it's definitely still artificial in the  sense that we produce it but it's increasingly
producing itself it's  increasingly learning and adapting by itself so artificial is a kind of
wishful thinking that it's still under our control and it's getting out of our  control so in this
sense it is becoming an alien force not necessarily evil  again it can also do a lot of good things
but the first thing to realize is it's alien we don't understand how it  works or in one of the most
shocking things about all this technology you talk to the people who lead it and you  ask them
questions about how it works what can I do and it says they said we don't know I mean we we know how
we  built it initially but then it it really learns by itself now there is an entire  discussion to
be had about whether this is a life form or not now I think that it still doesn't have  any
Consciousness and uh I don't think that it's impossible for it to develop Consciousness but I don't
think it's  necessary for it to develop Consciousness either that's a problematic that's an open
question but  life doesn't necessarily mean consciousness we have a lot of life forms microorganisms
plants whatever  fungi which we think they don't have Consciousness we still regard them as a  life
form and I think AI is getting very very close to that position ultimately of  course what is life
is a philosophical question I mean we Define the boundaries  and you know like is a virus life or
not we think that an amoeba is life but a virus it's somewhere just on on the  borderline between
life and not life um then it's you know it's it's language  it's our choice of words so it's I think
it's less it is  important of course how we call AI but the most important thing is to really
understand what we are facing and not to comfort ourselves with this kind of wishful thinking oh
it's something we  created it's our under our control if it does something wrong we'll just pull the
plug nobody knows how to pull the plug  anymore I'm going to take a question from our online
audience  um I've uh this is from Michael Brown in the US what do you think about the possibility
that artificial general  intelligence already exists and it or those who have access to artificial
general intelligence are already influencing societal systems I think  it's very very unlikely we
wouldn't be sitting here if the actually existed an  artificial general intelligence when I look at
the world and the chaotic stage it's I mean artificial general  intelligence is really the end of
human history and it's such a powerful thing it's not  something that anybody can contain and um so
when I look at the chaotic  state of the world I'm quite confident again from a historical
perspective that  nobody has it anywhere um how much time it will take to develop artificial general
intelligence I don't  know um but to threaten the foundations of civilization we don't need
artificial  general intelligence and then going back to social media very very primitive AI  was
still sufficient to create enormous social and political chaos if I think  about it in kind of
evolutionary terms so AI now just crawled out of the organic soup like the first organisms  that
crawled out of the organic soup four billion years ago how long it will take it to reach
Tyrannosaurus Rex how long it will take it to reach Homo sapiens not for billion  years could be
just 40 years it's the thing about digital Evolution it's moving on a  completely different time
scale than organic evolution can I thank you it's  been absolutely wonderful it's been such a treat
to have you here and  I've no doubt you'll stay with us for a little uh while afterwards but the
whole  audience please join me in thanking [Applause]